Welcome to the first lesson on EC2.
EC2 is the Elastic Compute Cloud and it's an elastic service that allows you to launch compute resources
on the AWS cloud.
Now in the AWS world we call these instances and they're very similar to virtual machines that you
might have on your VMware or hyper-v infrastructure on-premise.
Each instance has an operating system some storage and a certain amount of virtual hardware associated
with it including CPU ram and network capabilities.
If we go in and try and launch an instance we can see that we have a few options as to what type of
image we choose. An Amazon machine
Image is a template that contains the configuration for your instance and you can choose some predefined
images here and what you can see is that you can choose the operating system.
So we've got Amazon Linux, Red Hat, SUSE Linux and Ubuntu and there's many more. We've got windows
on here as well.
And once we've chosen the image we want we can then choose the virtual hardware platform we're going
to put it on to.
But just while we're in here I'll show you that under the AWS marketplace you can also find Amazon
machine images that come with third-party software such as firewalls and load balancers pre-installed
and you pay a slightly higher cost for these because they include the usage of the actual software as
well. And you can also see community AMIs.
So these are ones that have been shared by people for public use and you can see a list of operating
systems that you can filter by on the left here.
So if we go back into the quick start and choose select we then get to choose an instance type.
Now you'll see here that there's lots of different instance types and they're optimized for different
use cases.
So you might need an instance with more compute or more memory or storage optimized or you might need
a GPU for instance.
So you can select from all of these different instance types to get the correct virtual hardware configuration
that you need and that includes the CPU, the memory, storage, and the network performance.
Now we're not actually going to launch an instance right now we're going to do that in the next lesson.
Now before we go any further I just want to point something out to you.
You may notice that sometimes the console looks slightly different on your screen.
And the reason is AWS change the console over time.
Now usually it's just a cosmetic difference but sometimes they do make material updates that are quite
significant.
If you can't find something or you believe it's changed in a big way please let me know and I'll try
and help you and I'll also update the video.
This particular video has been updated because there were a couple of changes that I wanted to include.
So you may notice that it's slightly different to the other lessons in the rest of the section.
You may also notice I've got this new EC2 experience up here.
And by the time you watch this you might not have this but at the moment you have the option to choose
a new experience.
And when you flick that toggle switch you actually get directed to a slightly different version of the
console.
Now it's not massively different.
The items on the left here I think are pretty much the same but they've changed the layout in the middle.
Now I'm just going to switch it off for now and we'll continue.
Now if you go under limits you can see here the limits for what you're allowed to run in the AWS cloud
by default.
Now almost all of these limits are extendable if you contact AWS but by default you'll find that
for instance you can only run a certain amount of a resource on a AWS.
Now it used to be a per instance basis for how many instances you could run.
They changed that recently to a per vCPU.
So now you can see that you've got a limit here of 1280 vCPUS.
If you want to run an instance of one of these families on the left here you can see the instances that
are running, at the moment we don't have any.
And you can also then look at the instance times which we saw before.
And this will give you the full list of all the different instance types and families that are available.
Now I want to quickly cover some of the pricing models we see too.
If I go here and launch an instance it's called launching an on-demand instance and you don't get any
discounts but it's very flexible you can just launch these and terminate them whenever you want to.
But there are a couple of other options.
So one of them is reserved instances.
And in this case you can purchase a Reserved Instance and you can choose the amount of time that you
want to reserve this for.
Now the options are 12 months or 36 months so one year or three years and this means that you're committed
to paying for these instances for that period of time.
Now in return for this commitment you get a big discount can be up to 75 percent of the on-demand price.
But of course he'd only use this for steady state workloads that you know you want to run for that period
of time.
We also have spot requests where spot requests what you are doing is purchasing some spare capacity
for my AWS at a much discounted rate.
So what happens is AWS often have some capacity that's not being used and they'll give you the opportunity
to use some of that capacity at a discounted rate.
Now the caveat with this is that at any point in time when somebody wants to pay the full rate for that
capacity AWS can shut down your instances you do get notified but you need to know that.
So people use this for instance for large compute jobs that are very expensive normally and they really
need that sort of reduction in cost.
So think of large computing jobs that are doing some kind of batch processing.
It's very important that your applications can withstand being shut down and terminated when AWS
need that capacity back.
So you have to make sure that whatever you're running on a spot instance the data or the state of that
application is being saved somewhere.
There's a new feature called savings plans.
This is very recent.
I haven't seen this coming up on the exam yet but it may well come up on the SAA-C02 version of the
exam.
Now this is similar to reserved instances but it gives you the option to choose different compute models
such as EC2 and Fargate which is a container service.
Another option that we have is dedicated hosts a dedicated host is a physical server in EC2 that you
can use the capacity of and it's dedicated for your use.
That means even though EC2 is typically multi-tenant so you're sharing the underlying hardware with other
customers.
If you use a dedicated host you're not sharing the underlying hardware.
It's dedicated to you.
We also have scheduled instances and this is where you can purchase some capacity on a recurring schedule.
So if you run certain workloads on a recurring basis but not constantly then scheduled reserved instances
might be the way to go.
Another thing we have is capacity reservations.
In this case you're actually reserving some capacity to ensure it's available for you when you actually
need to run some resources.
Now AWS have a lot of capacity available but occasionally they can run out of capacity so this can
be useful if you have a highly critical workload and you need to make sure that you can run it at a
certain time.
Now we covered AMIs before and here you can see the public images and the private images.
We don't have any at the moment but you can see those that are shared publicly.
So these are the templates for the software configuration for your instances.
We then have the elastic block store. Elastic block store is the underlying storage that's used with
EC2 instances, this is block based storage and you can choose from a few different types of EBS
volume. So you can choose from SSD and you can choose from hard disk drives.
So magnetic style.
Now with the SSD especially with the provision IOPS you can actually choose the amount of IOPS you want.
You can specify the amount of performance you need.
Now we're going to cover EBS in much more detail later in the course.
We then have some networking features.
So we have networking and security.
We have security groups which are instance level firewalls.
We have elastic Elastic IPs which are static public IP addresses that you can allocate to your account.
And if you do so Amazon will provide a static IP to you and you actually need to use it. If you don't
use it
you have to pay and if you do use it you don't pay for these.
And that's just Amazon incentivizing you to make sure you use public IPs that are in demand.
We can also see something called placement groups that we'll cover later in this section and network
interfaces where you can create what are called elastic network interfaces.
So think of it as being a virtual network card that you can move between instances.
Now load balancers and auto scaling these are a couple of concepts we're going to cover in great detail
in this course but we don't need to go into that now.
So that's it for a quick overview of EC2.
And we're now going to go into much more detail and actually start launching some resources in the next
few lectures.